# Errors

The following page hosts the best practises and conventions about Go errors.

## Table of Contents

- [Handling](errors.md#handling)

## Handling

Go's philosophy is that failure is part of normal operation, and errors should be treated as first-class citizens. For
this reason, and unlike exception-based languages, it takes advance of the support for multiple return values to handle
errors, by returning an error type parameters as the last return value for a function. The latter is not strictly
necessary, but it is a convention among the Go's community.

Thus, the calling function is responsible for checking the return error argument, comparing it to nil, and taking
appropriate action, such as propagate it, so that becomes a failure of the calling routine, retry the failed operation,
probably with a delay between tries, or print the error and stop the program gracefully, an extremely discouraged
option, except for the main package of a program.

In case there are multiple return parameters, zero value is explicitly assigned on the return statement. Do not use
previously declared variables, unless it is really necessary, since forces you to read backwards the entire code base to
find the last assignments, and can contain a non-zero value that confuses the function caller.

```go
func getUsers() ([]User, error) {
	dbUsers, err := getUsersFromDatabase()
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}
	users, err := parseDatabaseUsers(dbUsers)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}
	return users, nil
}
```

As has been said, there are some error cases where partial results can be useful. For example, the ```io.ReadAll```
function returns read data until an error or EOF, so the caller function can process the incomplete information before
handling the error. Anyway, this unusual behavior should be clearly documented.

```go
func ReadAll(r Reader) ([]byte, error) {
	b := make([]byte, 0, 512)
	for {
		if len(b) == cap(b) {
			// Add more capacity (let append pick how much).
			b = append(b, 0)[:len(b)]
		}
		n, err := r.Read(b[len(b):cap(b)])
		b = b[:len(b)+n]
		if err != nil {
			if err == EOF {
				err = nil
			}
			return b, err
		}
	}
}
```

This error handling style may seem unnatural to those developers used to work with exception based programing languages,
but there are solid software engineering principles underlying this approach.

First, although the exception handling style may produce shorter code, that doesn't mean it's easier to maintain. In
fact, usually the opposite happens. Go bets on an idiomatic style that favors the readability and maintainability, even
if it takes more lines.

Seconds, exceptions produces at least one new code path, which could be invisible on those languages that donâ€™t include
a throw exception declaration in the function signature. Imagine what happens when they aren't properly handled.
Instead, Go uses the ordinary control-flow mechanisms like if and return to respond to errors. Requires to pay more
attention, but on the other hand, reduces unexpected behaviours.

Last but not least, Go's error handling style is governed by the same compiler rules as the business code, that is, the
developers must read all declared variables, in this case, the error ones, and either take previously described actions
or explicitly ignore it by using an underscore (_) symbol. It goes without saying that ignoring possible errors is never
a good practice.

Sources:

- [Learning Go by Jon Bodner](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/learning-go/9781492077206/)
- [The Go Programming Language by Alan A. A. Donovan and Brian W. Kernighan](https://www.gopl.io)